All right so let's implement delete for heaps.
We're going to need a delete method and a fix.
Bhalo method for when we look down the tree when we're doing our heape ify process.
We're also going to need methods for is empty and for getting the child indices for an element in the
array so let's add the is empty and get child methods first.
So I'm going to say public boolean is empty in basically the heap is empty if the size equals zero.
So we're just going to return size.
Equals zero.
And that's our.
Is empty math.
It and now we want a method for getting the children of an element in the array or a child any way we
can only get the index for one child at a time.
So we're going to say public can't get trialed and we want the index of the parent so the element that
we want to get a child for and we also need to know whether we want to get the left or right child saw
say boolean left and if left is true we want the left child if it's false.
We want the right child.
So all we're going to do is return the result of the expressions we looked at in the slide.
So we're going to say return to Times Index.
Remember it's two times.
And then if we want the left child we add one.
And if we want the right child we add two.
So we're going to say plus left if it's the left child we want one.
Otherwise we want to.
And so that's our Get child so we want to Times index plus one for the left child or two times index
plus two for the right child.
So now that we have those Let's write our delete method.
I'll put it right here so I'll say public it delete.
We're going to return the value that we deleted and we're going to want an integer and we're going to
take the index not the value.
Now why are we taking the index.
Well if we take the value then we're going to have to search the heap for the index of the value and
we can do that of course but we'd have to use a linear search.
We can't use a binary search because you can only do a binary search on a sorted array and we can't
sort the array because that would obviously blow away our heape structure.
I could accept the value here and then the first thing we do in the method is a linear search.
But instead I'm just going to take the index.
One thing to keep in mind is when you're working with heaps you you pretty much never are going to one
to just take some random value off the heap.
You always want to take the route off the heap and so you just have a delete method that doesn't take
anything because it's understood that you want the root.
But some implementations will support deleting or removing any element in the heap.
And so that's what we're going to do here.
But when we're writing the main method code we'll have to keep in mind that we have to pass the index
not the value.
OK so the first thing we're going to do is check whether the heap is empty.
So we'll say gif is empty.
And if that's the case we're going to do the same thing we did an insert and just thrown exceptions
will throw a new index out of bounds exception and we'll say heap is empty and that's it.
So we're not going to worry about doing anything else.
If that's not the case the first thing we want to do is get the parent.
So any parent equals get parent index.
And so this will be the parent of the deleted item and then we want to save the deleted value off because
we're going to return that at the end of the method so it deleted value equals heat index.
And so we've got the parent of the value we want to delete.
We've saved off the deleted value and now we're going to replace heape index with the value that set
the rightmost position in the array and the index for that will be size minus 1 because remember that
size always contains the next available position.
And so we're going to say heat index equals heap size minus 1.
And so that's doing the replacement steps in the slides.
We took 67 and uses a replacement value that's what we're doing here.
So the rightmost node in the heap right most value in the heap will now replace whatever was at the
index.
OK.
So at this point we've done the replacement value and now we're going to want to look up or down the
heap depending on what the situation is.
If the valuate heap index is now greater than its parent we need to fix the heap above.
If devaluate heap index is less than its parent then we need to look at the heap below because it's
possible that it's also less than one of its children.
And so let's write the fix below method before we continue here.
And I'll put it below here and I'll say private Voyt fix heap below.
And we're going to take the index of the start position and that will be the index of the item that
we deleted.
So where we put the replacement value.
And then we're going to except this last heat index parameter.
Now we don't need this for delete but when we implement the heapsort algorithm we're going to need this.
And this basically says this is the last index of the heap.
So in our array right now the heat goes from position zero to position size minus 1.
And so we're going to pass size minus one as last heat index So this essentially tells us the last position
of the heap in the array for delete.
We don't really need it but we're going to use this method for heapsort.
All right so I'm going to declare it.
I field called child to swap.
And now what we're going to do is a swapping phase so we're going to compare the node index with its
two children and we're going to swap it if necessary.
If the valuate heat index is less than either of its children we're going to swap it with the child
that has the greatest value as we saw in the slides.
So we're going to say wall
is less than or equal to last index.
And so we're going to we're fixing below and so we're starting it.
Index them or going to the end of the heap.
We're not looking at indices that are lower than index because those are notes that are sitting above
index and this is fixed below.
And so we're going to say in left child equals get child index.
True we've passed through and we want the index of the left child and into right child equals get child
index falls.
And so this gets us the left child of the node at heat index and the right child of the node at heat
index.
And now we're going to make sure that these indices are valid because remember if the no doesn't have
a right child or doesn't have a left child then these calculations will actually give us indices that
are size and beyond.
So the return indices that aren't part of the heap and we know the last valid indexes last heape index
for this we could just see you size minus whine as I said but you'll see when we do the heapsort that
we actually need this parameter.
So we're going to say if left child is less than or equal to last heap index that means that this node
has a left child.
And so now we're going to test whether it has a right child.
So we're going to say if right child is greater than the last heat index then it does not have a right
child.
That's essentially saying that we calculated an index for the right child.
That's outside the bounds of the heap.
And so in that case the child that we want to swap is a left child because this if this condition passes
it has a left child if this condition fails it doesn't have a right child.
And so in this case we have a left child but no right child so the child to swap will equal the love
child because that's all there is.
Now if this condition fails it means that we also have a right child.
And so in that case we need to swap it with the child that has the largest value.
So we're going to say child swap equals and we're going to say he left child is greater than he.
Right child then we want to swap it with the left child.
Otherwise we want to swap but the right child.
And so here we're assigning child to swap with the index of the child that has the greatest value.
So if he left child is greater than he right child we're going to assign the index of the left child
to the child to swap.
Otherwise it's going to get the right child.
So we've assigned child to swap but that doesn't mean we actually want to swap the child because we
now need to compare the value it heap index with the child to swap value.
If devaluate heat index is greater than the child to swap value then we're done.
I mean the parent has greater than the child.
We only need to swap if the value at index is less then the child.
So we're going to say give heat index
is less than heap of the child that we're going to potentially swap with than we do a swap.
So we say temp equals.
And I see the compiler is complaining here that child to swap might not have been initialized and that's
because I shouldn't have put this brace here.
This is still supposed to be taking place within here because if the left child is greater than last
heape index we're dealing with a value that doesn't have any children meaning there's nothing to swap.
So let me reformat the code to get that in.
OK so let's continue.
So compilers not complaining anymore so if the value the replacement value is less than its largest
child we want to swap it with the largest child so when we're going to say temp equals heat index
and then we're going to say heat index equals child to swap and the final step of course is heap child
to swap equals ten.
And so we've now swapped the replacement value with its largest child.
Now if the replacement value is greater than or equal to the largest child our heap is good.
So we finished defining the heap.
And so in that case you want to break out of the loop because we're done and then we're going to want
to rinse and repeat.
So now we want to compare the replacement value with its new children and the replacement value is now
sitting at index child to swap because we just swapped it and we know we just walked it because if we
haven't done any swapping we're going to break out of the loop.
And so the last thing we're going to do in the loop is say Index equals child to swap.
And now we want to end the loop.
And so in the loop what we're doing we're getting the two children of the element at position index
them when we first enter the loop that will be the index of where we've put the replacement value so
the index of where the value we deleted was and then if we just do that and then if the element in that
position doesn't have any children.
In fact down here on this if we're going to say else break and that is actually the entire method and
so if the position that we're examining has children we may have some heap of fine to do if it doesn't
have children we're done.
I mean there's nothing underneath it.
So it's not possible for it to be less than it's children it doesn't have any children.
And so as long as the index we're looking at is part of the heat we get the two children indices and
then we checked to see if those indices are actually part of the heap if they're not then we're done
because we're actually dealing with a leaf if they are or if at least if the left child is we check
for a right child if we have a left child but no right child then obviously by default we're going to
swat with the left child if this test passes and if we have two children then we're going to want to
swap with the larger of the two and then after we've decided which child we'd want to swap with We then
compare the value at index with the child we'd swap with and if the value is less than that child we
do have to swap them if there's no swapping to be done.
If the value at heat index is greater equal to its child we're done.
The heap is once again satisfying the heap property and so we can break otherwise once we've done the
swapping we now have to compare the replacement value with its new children.
We've put the replacement value into child to swap at this point.
That's new index and so we're going to update index to that and loop back around and we're going to
keep doing that until we break out of the loop.
Now if you're wondering here why we're checking for a left child.
And then for a right child and you might be thinking well wait wait a minute what if the node has a
right child but not a left child Well that's not possible because a heap has to be a complete tree.
And so the only possibilities are the node has two children or the node has a left child in a heap.
We can't have a node that has no left child but a right child because that would mean that we don't
have a complete tree and that would mean we don't have a heap and so we only have to worry about.
We have a left child and a right child which is this case here or we have a left child but no right
child in which case by default we're going to swap with the left child.
OK and that's it for fix heape below.
So now that we have our fix here fellow Masset Let's finish our delete method.
And so here we're going to say if index equals zero meaning we're dealing with the root or keep index
is less than keep parent then we want to fix the heat below the low and we're going to pass in there
and we're going to pass size minus one.
So what we're saying here is if we're dealing with the root.
So if we if the node we deleted was the root and so the replacement value has gone into the root then
obviously we can only look down the tree and if the value the replacement value is less than its parent
that means we don't have to look up the tree because we know this guy is then going to be less than
everything above the tree.
And so in this case we need to look at the tree below heat index and potentially fix that.
And so if it's the root we can only look below.
And if the replacement value is less than its parent then we know above the replacement value is sound
it meets the heap property and so we're going to go below.
Otherwise we're going to look above.
So we're going to fix Hape above and in this case we just need the index.
Once we've done that so we've fixed our he.
We need to decrement the size and then of course we're going to return our deleted value and that's
it.
So we come in if the heap is empty we throw an exception.
Otherwise we get the parent and we store off the deleted value we get the replacement value and put
it where the deleted value used to be.
We then fix our heap we decrement the size because we've deleted one node and then we return the deleted
value.
OK so while I'm in here I'm going to add a print method so we can actually look at what's going on after
we've performed some operations on it here.
So I'll say public boy.
Print the
and this will be straightforward because we have an array all savor equals zero I less than size plus
plus and will say a system that outcrop print line here.
I actually am going to make this print so it will all come out on one line and then I'll say system
got out of print put a comma in there and then when we finished printing our heap all systems that are
out of print line to print a new line and that's it for our print method.
So now let's go to our main method and let's start working with our heap.
I'm going to say here he equals a new key and I'll give it a capacity of 10.
And now we're going to build the heap that we went over in the delete slides.
So to say he got in search and we're going to insert 80.
That's going to be the route he thought.
Insert 75.
Insert 60 dot insert 68 insert 55 dot insert 40.
Only 2 more to go.
A dot insert 52 and he insert 67 so remember when we're inserting we're were we start at the root and
then we do the Dunton to the next level and to the left and right child and then go down to the next
level and fill in each level from left to right.
And so this will build the heap that we saw in the slides.
All right so let's printer he heaped up print here and before we start deleting notes let's run and
make sure we're building are he properly.
All right.
So we have 80 75 60 68 55 40 52 in 67 so that's just the array printed out in order.
And that's the order that we expect.
So now let's delete some notes.
So let's say he Daut delete and remember we want to give that index.
And so let's give the index the seventy five because we went through that on the slide.
So that's the index 1 and then we'll print the he again
and we see that 75 is gone and now 68 is the left child of 80 and 60 is the right child and 67 has been
moved below 68 because 67 would have been with the replacement value and brought up here.
And so that's working fine.
So let's replace 40 so I'll change this to five and let's run now.
And we'll see that 40 is gone and we've got 80 75 and 67 so 67 is the right child of 80 and then 68
and 55 are the children of 75 and 60 and 52 are the children of 67 and so everything seems to be working
fine.
We could try deleting the route just for fun.
Let's do that.
And the roots are gone and so 75.
Now at the root it's got children 68 and 60 68 has children 67 and 55 and 60 has children 40 and 52
and so that's working fine.
And so that's it for delete.
It's a matter of replacing the deleted value with the rightmost value and then fixing the heap either
by looking up the heap or down the heap.
All right we haven't written one last method and we'll do that in the next video it's going to be a
very quick video because this will be getting the root node and it's a very simple operation.
So see you there.